 is attended with severe pain
which does not yield to blistering, the periosteum may be incised and
the sclerosed bone perforated with a drill or trephine.

#Lesions of Bone in Inherited Syphilis.#--_Craniotabes_, in which the
flat bones of the skull undergo absorption in patches, was formerly
regarded as syphilitic, but it is now known to result from prolonged
malnutrition from any cause. _Bossing of the skull_ resulting in the
formation of Parrot's nodes is also being withdrawn from the category of
syphilitic affections. The lesions in infancy--epiphysitis, bossing of
the skull, and craniotabes--have been referred to in the chapter on
inherited syphilis.

_Epiphysitis or Syphilitic Perichondritis._--The first of these terms is
misleading, because the lesion involves the ossifying junction and the
shaft of the bone, and the epiphysis only indirectly. The young bone is
replaced by granulation tissue, so that large clear areas are seen with
the X-rays. The symptoms are referred to the joint, because it is there
that the muscles are inserted and drag on the perichondrium when
movement occurs; swelling is most marked in the vicinity of the joint,
and it may be added to by effusion into the synovial cavity. The baby,
usually under six months, is noticed to be feverish and fretful and to
cry when touched. The mother discovers that the pain is caused by moving
a particular limb, usually the arm, as the humerus, radius, and ulna are
the bones most commonly affected; the limb, moreover, hangs useless at
the side as if paralysed, and the condition was formerly described as
_syphilitic pseudo-paralysis_.

The lesions met with later correspond to those of the tertiary period of
the acquired disease, but as they affect bones which are still actively
growing, the effects are more striking. Gummatous disease may come and
go over periods of many years, with the result that the external
appearance and architectural arrangement of a long bone come to be
profoundly altered. In the tibia, for example, the shaft is bowed
forward in a gentle curve, which is compared to the curve of a
sabre--"sabre-blade" deformity (Fig. 132). The diffuse thickening all
round the bone obscures the sharp margins so that the bone becomes
circular in section and the anterior and mesial edges are blunted, and
the comparison to a cucumber is deserved. In some cases the tibia is
actually increased in length as well as in girth.

[Illustration: FIG. 132.--Sabre-blade Deformity of Left Tibia in
Inherited Syphilis.

(From a photograph lent by Sir George T. Beatson.)]

The contrast between the grossly enlarged and misshapen tibia and the
normal or even attenuated fibula is a striking one.

_Treatment_ is carried out on lines similar to those recommended in the
acquired disease. When curving of the tibia causes disability in
walking, the bone may be straightened by a cuneiform resection.

_Syphilitic dactylitis_ is met with chiefly in children. It may affect
any of the fingers or toes, but is commonest in the first phalanx of the
index-finger or of the thumb. Several fingers may be attacked at the
same time or in succession. The lesion consists in a gummatous
infiltration of the soft parts surrounding the phalanx, or a gummatous
osteomyelitis, but there is practically no tendency to break down and
discharge, or to the formation of a sequestrum as is so common in
tuberculous dactylitis.

The finger becomes the seat of a swelling, which is more evident on the
dorsal aspect, and, according to the distribution and extent of the
disease, it is acorn-shaped, fusiform, or cylindrical. It is firm and
elastic, and usually painless. The movements are impaired, especially if
the joints are involved. In its early stages the disease is amenable to
anti-syphilitic treatment, and complete recovery is the rule.


HYDATID DISEASE

This rare disease results from the lodgment of the embryos of the taenia
echinoccus, which are conveyed to the marrow by the blood-stream. The
cysts are small, usually about the size of a pin-head, and they are
present in enormous numbers scattered throughout the marrow. The parts
of the skeleton most often affected are the articular ends of the long
bones, the bodies of the vertebrae, and the pelvis.

As the cysts increase in number and in size, the framework of the bone
is gradually absorbed, and there result excavations or cavities. The
marrow and spongy bone first disappear, the compact tissue then becomes
thin, and pathological fracture may result. The bone becomes expanded,
and the cysts may escape through perforations into the surrounding
cellular tissue, and when thus freed from confinement may attain
considerable dimensions. Suppuration from superadded pyogenic infection
may be attended with extensive necrosis, and lead to disorganisation of
the adjacent joint.

_Clinical Features._--The patient complains of deep-seated pains. In
superficial bones, such as the tibia, there is enlargement, and it may
be possible to recognise egg-shell cra