
forty in the upper end of the tibia or lower end of the femur. It grows
slowly and causes little pain, and may long escape recognition unless an
examination is made with the X-rays. Although these tumours have been
known to give rise to metastases, they are, as a rule, innocent and are
to be treated as such. When located in the shaft of a long bone,
pathological fracture is liable to occur.

_Diagnosis and X-ray Appearances of Myeloma._--The early diagnosis of
myeloma is made with the aid of the X-rays: the typical appearance is
that of a rounded or oval clear area bounded by a shell of bone of
diminishing thickness (Fig. 145). The inflammatory lesions at the ends
of the long bones--tubercle, syphilitic gumma, and Brodie's abscess,
that resemble myeloma, are all attended with the formation of new bone
in greater or lesser amount. The myeloma is also to be diagnosed from
chondroma, from sarcoma, and from osteomyelitis fibrosa cystica.

[Illustration: FIG. 145.--Radiogram of Myeloma of Humerus.

(Mr. J. W. Struthers' case.)]

_Treatment._--In early cases the cortex is opened up to give free access
to the tumour tissue, which is scraped out with the spoon. Bloodgood
advises the use of Esmarch's tourniquet, and that the curetting be
followed by painting with pure carbolic acid and then rinsing with
alcohol; a rod of bone is inserted to fill the gap. In advanced cases
the segment of bone is resected and a portion of the tibia or fibula
from the other limb inserted into the gap; a tube of radium should also
be introduced.

The coexistence of diffuse myelomatosis of the skeleton and albumosuria
(Bence-Jones) is referred to on p. 474. Myeloma occurs in the jaws,
taking origin in the marrow or from the periosteum of the alveolar
process, and is described elsewhere.

#Sarcoma# and #endothelioma# are the commonest tumours of bone, and
present wide variations in structure and in clinical features.
Structurally, two main groups may be differentiated: (1) the soft,
rapidly growing cellular tumours, and (2) those containing fully formed
fibrous tissue, cartilage, or bone.

(1) The _soft cellular tumours_ are composed mainly of spindle or round
cells; they grow from the marrow of the spongy ends or from the
periosteum of the long bones, the diploe of the skull, the pelvis,
vertebrae, and jaws. As they grow they may cause little alteration in the
contour of the bone, but they eat away its framework and replace it, so
that the continuity of the bone is maintained only by tumour tissue, and
pathological fracture is a frequent result. The small round-celled
sarcomas are among the most malignant tumours of bone, growing with
great rapidity, and at an early stage giving rise to secondary growths.

(2) The second group includes the _fibro-_, _osteo-_, and
_chondro-sarcomas_, and combinations of these; in all of them fully
formed tissues or attempts at fully formed tissues predominate over the
cellular elements. They grow chiefly from the deeper layer of the
periosteum, and at first form a projection on the surface, but later
tend to surround the bone (Fig. 150), and to invade its interior,
filling up the marrow spaces with a white, bone-like substance; in the
flat bones of the skull they may traverse the diploe and erupt on the
inner table. The tumour tissue next the shaft consists of a dense,
white, homogeneous material, from which there radiate into the softer
parts of the tumour, spicules, needles, and plates, often exhibiting a
fan-like arrangement (Fig. 151). The peripheral portion consists of soft
sarcomatous tissue, which invades the overlying soft parts. The
articular cartilage long resists destruction. The ossifying sarcoma is
met with most often in the femur and tibia, less frequently in the
humerus, skull, pelvis, and jaws. In the long bones it may grow from the
shaft, while the chondro-sarcoma more often originates at the
extremities. Sometimes they are multiple, several tumours appearing
simultaneously or one after another. Secondary growths are met with
chiefly in the lungs, metastasis taking place by way of the veins.

[Illustration: FIG. 146.--Periosteal Sarcoma of Femur in a young
subject.]

[Illustration: FIG. 147.--Periosteal Sarcoma of Humerus, after
maceration.

(Anatomical Museum, University of Edinburgh.)]

_Clinical Features._--Sarcoma is usually met with before the age of
thirty, and is comparatively common in children. Males suffer oftener
than females, in the proportion of two to one.

In _periosteal sarcoma_ the presence of a swelling is usually the first
symptom; the tumour is fusiform, firm, and regular in outline, and when
it occurs near the end of a long bone the limb frequently assumes a
characteristic "leg of mutton" shape (Fig. 146). The surface may be
uniform or bossed, the consistence varies at different parts, and the
swelling gradually tapers off along the shaft. On firm pressure, fine
crepitation may be felt from crushing of the delicate framework of new
bone.

[Illustration: FIG. 148.--Ch