 railway lines were
consolidated into national systems. The industrial population of
wage-earners rose into the tens of millions. The immigration of aliens
increased by leaps and bounds. The cities overshadowed the country. The
nation that had once depended upon Europe for most of its manufactured
goods became a competitor of Europe in the markets of the earth.

In the sphere of politics, the period witnessed the recovery of white
supremacy in the South; the continued discussion of the old questions,
such as the currency, the tariff, and national banking; and the
injection of new issues like the trusts and labor problems. As of old,
foreign affairs were kept well at the front. Alaska was purchased from
Russia; attempts were made to extend American influence in the Caribbean
region; a Samoan island was brought under the flag; and the Hawaiian
islands were annexed. The Monroe Doctrine was applied with vigor in the
dispute between Venezuela and Great Britain.

Assistance was given to the Cubans in their revolutionary struggle
against Spain and thus there was precipitated a war which ended in the
annexation of Porto Rico and the Philippines. American influence in the
Pacific and the Orient was so enlarged as to be a factor of great weight
in world affairs. Thus questions connected with foreign and "imperial"
policies were united with domestic issues to make up the warp and woof
of politics. In the direction of affairs, the Republicans took the
leadership, for they held the presidency during all the years, except
eight, between 1865 and 1900.


=References=

J.W. Foster, _A Century of American Diplomacy_; _American Diplomacy in
the Orient_.

W.F. Reddaway, _The Monroe Doctrine_.

J.H. Latane, _The United States and Spanish America_.

A.C. Coolidge, _United States as a World Power_.

A.T. Mahan, _Interest of the United States in the Sea Power_.

F.E. Chadwick, _Spanish-American War_.

D.C. Worcester, _The Philippine Islands and Their People_.

M.M. Kalaw, _Self-Government in the Philippines_.

L.S. Rowe, _The United States and Porto Rico_.

F.E. Chadwick, _The Relations of the United States and Spain_.

W.R. Shepherd, _Latin America_; _Central and South America_.


=Questions=

1. Tell the story of the international crisis that developed soon after
the Civil War with regard to Mexico.

2. Give the essential facts relating to the purchase of Alaska.

3. Review the early history of our interest in the Caribbean.

4. Amid what circumstances was the Monroe Doctrine applied in
Cleveland's administration?

5. Give the causes that led to the war with Spain.

6. Tell the leading events in that war.

7. What was the outcome as far as Cuba was concerned? The outcome for
the United States?

8. Discuss the attitude of the Filipinos toward American sovereignty in
the islands.

9. Describe McKinley's colonial policy.

10. How was the Spanish War viewed in England? On the Continent?

11. Was there a unified American opinion on American expansion?

12. Was this expansion a departure from our traditions?

13. What events led to foreign intervention in China?

14. Explain the policy of the "open door."


=Research Topics=

=Hawaii and Venezuela.=--Dewey, _National Problems_ (American Nation
Series), pp. 279-313; Macdonald, _Documentary Source Book_, pp. 600-602;
Hart, _American History Told by Contemporaries_, Vol. IV, pp. 612-616.

=Intervention in Cuba.=--Latane, _America as a World Power_ (American
Nation Series), pp. 3-28; Macdonald, _Documentary Source Book_, pp.
597-598; Roosevelt, _Autobiography_, pp. 223-277; Haworth, _The United
States in Our Own Time_, pp. 232-256; Hart, _Contemporaries_, Vol. IV,
pp. 573-578.

=The War with Spain.=--Elson, _History of the United States_, pp.
889-896.

=Terms of Peace with Spain.=--Latane, pp. 63-81; Macdonald, pp. 602-608;
Hart, _Contemporaries_, Vol. IV, pp. 588-590.

=The Philippine Insurrection.=--Latane, pp. 82-99.

=Imperialism as a Campaign Issue.=--Latane, pp. 120-132; Haworth, pp.
257-277; Hart, _Contemporaries_, Vol. IV, pp. 604-611.

=Biographical Studies.=--William McKinley, M.A. Hanna, John Hay;
Admirals, George Dewey, W.T. Sampson, and W.S. Schley; and Generals,
W.R. Shafter, Joseph Wheeler, and H.W. Lawton.

=General Analysis of American Expansion.=--_Syllabus in History_ (New
York State, 1920), pp. 142-147.




PART VII. PROGRESSIVE DEMOCRACY AND THE WORLD WAR




CHAPTER XXI

THE EVOLUTION OF REPUBLICAN POLICIES (1901-13)


=The Personality and Early Career of Roosevelt.=--On September 14, 1901,
when Theodore Roosevelt took the oath of office, the presidency passed
to a new generation and a leader of a new type recalling, if comparisons
must be made, Andrew Jackson rather than any Republican predecessor.
Roosevelt was brusque, hearty, restless, and fond of action--"a young
fellow of infinite dash and originality," as John Hay remarked of him;
combining the spirit of his old college, Harvard, with the breezy
freedom of the plains; interested in everything--a new species o