the sheath of the vessel is not
widely damaged, the gradually increasing tension of the extravasated
blood retained within it may ultimately arrest the haemorrhage. A clot
then forms between the lips of the wound in the vessel wall and projects
for a short distance into the lumen, without, however, materially
interfering with the flow through the vessel. The organisation of this
clot results in the healing of the wound in the vessel wall.

In other cases the blood escapes beyond the sheath and collects in the
surrounding tissues, and a traumatic aneurysm results. Secondary
haemorrhage may occur if the wound becomes infected.

The _treatment_ consists in enlarging the external wound to permit of
the damaged vessel being ligated above and below the puncture. In some
cases it may be possible to suture the opening in the vessel wall. When
circumstances prevent these measures being taken, the bleeding may be
arrested by making firm pressure over the wound with a pad; but this
procedure is liable to be followed by the formation of an aneurysm.

_Minute puncture of arteries_ such as frequently occur in the hypodermic
administration of drugs and in the use of exploring needles, are not
attended with any escape of blood, chiefly because of the elastic recoil
of the arterial wall; a tiny thrombus of platelets and thrombus forms at
the point where the intima is punctured.

#Incised Wounds.#--We here refer only to such incised wounds as partly
divide the vessel wall.

Longitudinal wounds show little tendency to gape, and are therefore not
attended with much bleeding. They usually heal rapidly, but, like
punctured wounds, are liable to be followed by the formation of an
aneurysm.

When, however, the incision in the vessel wall is oblique or transverse,
the retraction of the muscular coat causes the opening to gape, with the
result that there is haemorrhage, which, even in comparatively small
arteries, may be so profuse as to prove dangerous. When the associated
wound in the soft parts is valvular the haemorrhage is arrested and an
aneurysm may develop.

When a large arterial trunk, such as the external iliac, the femoral,
the common carotid, the brachial, or the popliteal, has been partly
divided, for example, in the course of an operation, the opening should
be closed with sutures--_arteriorrhaphy_. The circulation being
controlled by a tourniquet, or the artery itself occluded by a clamp,
fine silk or catgut stitches are passed through the outer and middle
coats after the method of Lembert, a fine, round needle being employed.
The sheath of the vessel or an adjacent fascia should be stitched
over the line of suture in the vessel wall. If infection be excluded,
there is little risk of thrombosis or secondary haemorrhage; and even if
thrombosis should develop at the point of suture, the artery is
obstructed gradually, and the establishment of a collateral circulation
takes place better than after ligation. In the case of smaller trunks,
or when suture is impracticable, the artery should be tied above and
below the opening, and divided between the ligatures.

#Gunshot Wounds of Blood Vessels.#--In the majority of cases injuries of
large vessels are associated with an external wound; the profusion of
the bleeding indicates the size of the damaged vessel, and the colour of
the blood and the nature of the flow denote whether an artery or a vein
is implicated.

When an artery is wounded a firm _haematoma_ may form, with an expansile
pulsation and a palpable thrill--whether such a haematoma remains
circumscribed or becomes diffuse depends upon the density or laxity of
the tissues around it. In course of time a _traumatic arterial aneurysm_
may develop from such a haematoma.

When an artery and its companion vein are injured simultaneously an
_arterio-venous aneurysm_ (p. 310) may develop. This frequently takes
place without the formation of a haematoma as the arterial blood finds
its way into the vein and so does not escape into the tissues. Even if a
haematoma forms it seldom assumes a great size. In time a swelling is
recognised, with a palpable thrill and a systolic bruit, loudest at the
level of the communication and accompanied by a continuous venous hum.

If leakage occurs into the tissues, the extravasated blood may occlude
the vein by pressure, and the symptoms of arterial aneurysm replace
those of the arterio-venous form, the systolic bruit persisting, while
the venous hum disappears.

_Gangrene_ may ensue if the blood supply is seriously interfered with,
or the signs of _ischaemia_ may develop; the muscles lose their
elasticity, become hard and paralysed, and anaesthesia of the "glove" or
"stocking" type, with other alterations of sensation ensue. Apart from
ischaemia, _reflex paralysis_ of motion and sensation of a transient kind
may follow injury of a large vessel.

_Treatment_ is carried out on the same lines as for similar injuries due
to other causes.


INJURIES OF VEINS

Veins are subject to the same forms of 