

The characters of this type of loose body are remarkably constant. It is
usually solitary, about the size of a bean or almond, concavo-convex in
shape, the convex aspect being smooth like an articular surface, the
concave aspect uneven and nodulated and showing reparative changes,
healing over of the raw surface, and the new formation of fibrous
tissue, hyaline cartilage and bone, the necessary nutriment being
derived from the synovial fluid (Fig. 167). The body is sometimes found
to be lodged in a defect or excavation in one of the articular surfaces,
usually the medial condyle of the femur, from which it is readily
shelled out by means of an elevator. It presents on section a layer of
articular cartilage on the convex aspect and a variable thickness of
spongy bone beneath this.

The origin of these bodies is one of the most debated questions in
surgical pathology; they obviously consist of a portion of the articular
surface of one of the bones, but how this is detached still remains a
mystery; some maintain that it is purely traumatic; Konig regards them
as portions of the articular surface which have been detached by a
morbid process which he calls "osteochondritis dessicans."

_Multiple Chondromas and Osteomas of the Synovial Membrane._--In this
rare type of loose body, the surface of the synovial membrane is studded
with small sessile or pedunculated tumours composed of pure hyaline
cartilage, or of bone, or of transition stages between cartilage and
bone. They are pearly white in colour, pitted and nodular on the
surface, rarely larger than a pea, although when compressed they may
cake into masses of considerable size. With the movements of the joint
many of the tumours become detached and lie in the serous exudate
excited by their presence. They are found also in the diverticula of the
synovial membrane, in the shoulder in the downward prolongation along
the tendon of the biceps, in the hip in the bursal extension beneath the
psoas.

The patient complains of increasing disability of the limb, movements of
the joint becoming more and more restricted and painful. There is
swelling corresponding to the distended capsule of the joint, and on
palpation the bodies moving under the fingers yield a sensation as of
grains of rice shifting in a bag. If the bodies are so numerous as to be
tightly packed together, the impression is that of a plastic mass having
the shape of the synovial sac. The stiffness and the cracking on
movement may suggest arthritis deformans, but the X-ray appearances make
the diagnosis an easy one. We have observed two cases of this affection
in the knee-joint of adult women, one in the shoulder-joint of an adult
male (Fig. 168), and Caird has observed one in the hip. The treatment
consists in opening the joint by free incision and removing the bodies.

_Displacement of the menisci_ of the knee is referred to with injuries
of that joint.




INDEX


  Abdominal aneurysm, 313
    aorta, compression of, 269
      embolus of, 93

  Abscess, 46
    acute circumscribed, 46
    of bone, 448
    Brodie's, 448
    chronic, 139
    cold, 139
    embolic, 66
    formation of, 47
    Hilton's method of opening, 50
    pointing of, 48
    pyaemic, 287
    residual, 141
    of skin, multiple, 382
    stitch, 51
    treatment of, 49
    tuberculous, 139, 141
      peri-articular, 514, 517

  Achillo-bursitis, 432

  Achillo-dynia, 422

  Acidosis, 251

  Acromion bursa, 429

  Actinomycosis, 126

  Active hyperaemia, 39

  Acupuncture in aneurysm, 308

  Acute arthritis of infants, 440
    necrosis of bone, 439

  Adductor longus muscle, rupture of, 408

  Adenoma, 202
    malignant, 209
    sebaceous, 393
    of skin, 393
    varieties of, 202

  Adiposus dolorosa, 186

  Aerobes, 19

  Air embolism, 265
    hunger, 276

  Albumosuria, 195, 474, 492

  Aleppo boil, 129

  Alexins, 22

  Ambrine, 13, 238

  Amputation neuroma, 344

  Anaerobes, 19

  Anaesthesia, after nerve injuries, 347

  Analgesia, 347

  Anaphylaxis, 23

  Anatomical tubercle, 134

  Anatomy. _See_ Surgical Anatomy

  Anel's operation for aneurysm, 307

  Aneurysm, 300. _See also_ Individual Arteries
    abdominal, 313
    acupuncture in, 308
    amputation in, 310
    by anastomosis, 298
    Anel's operation for, 307, 310
    arterio-venous, 263
    axillary, 318
    of bone, 498
    brachial, 318
    Brasdor's operation for, 308
    cirsoid, 299
    Colt's method of wiring for, 309
    compression for, 308
    consolidated, 304, 305
    differential diagnosis of, 305
    diffused, 302
    digital compression in, 308
    excision of, 307
    of forearm and hand, 318
    fusiform, 301
    gelatin injections in, 309
    Hunter's operation for, 307
    iliac, 318
    of individual arteries, 312
    inguinal, 318
    innominate, 314
    intracranial, 316
    of leg and foot, 320
    ligation of artery for, 307
    Macewen's acupuncture for, 308
    Matas' operation for, 307
    Moore-Corradi method, 308
    natural cure of, 305
  