York and
Chicago kept their boards of aldermen.

=The City Manager Plan.=--A few years' experience with commission
government revealed certain patent defects. The division of the work
among five men was frequently found to introduce dissensions and
irresponsibility. Commissioners were often lacking in the technical
ability required to manage such difficult matters as fire and police
protection, public health, public works, and public utilities. Some one
then proposed to carry over into city government an idea from the
business world. In that sphere the stockholders of each corporation
elect the directors and the directors, in turn, choose a business
manager to conduct the affairs of the company. It was suggested that the
city commissioners, instead of attempting to supervise the details of
the city administration, should select a manager to do this. The scheme
was put into effect in Sumter, South Carolina, in 1912. Like the
commission plan, it became popular. Within eight years more than one
hundred and fifty towns and cities had adopted it. Among the larger
municipalities were Dayton, Springfield (Ohio), Akron, Kalamazoo, and
Phoenix. It promised to create a new public service profession, that of
city manager.


MEASURES OF ECONOMIC REFORM

=The Spirit of American Reform.=--The purification of the ballot, the
restriction of the spoils system, the enlargement of direct popular
control over the organs of government were not the sole answers made by
the reformers to the critics of American institutions. Nor were they the
most important. In fact, they were regarded not as ends in themselves,
but as means to serve a wider purpose. That purpose was the promotion of
the "general welfare." The concrete objects covered by that broad term
were many and varied; but they included the prevention of extortion by
railway and other corporations, the protection of public health, the
extension of education, the improvement of living conditions in the
cities, the elimination of undeserved poverty, the removal of gross
inequalities in wealth, and more equality of opportunity.

All these things involved the use of the powers of government. Although
a few clung to the ancient doctrine that the government should not
interfere with private business at all, the American people at large
rejected that theory as vigorously as they rejected the doctrines of an
extreme socialism which exalts the state above the individual. Leaders
representing every shade of opinion proclaimed the government an
instrument of common welfare to be used in the public interest. "We must
abandon definitely," said Roosevelt, "the _laissez-faire_ theory of
political economy and fearlessly champion a system of increased
governmental control, paying no attention to the cries of worthy people
who denounce this as socialistic." This view was shared by Mr. Taft, who
observed: "Undoubtedly the government can wisely do much more ... to
relieve the oppressed, to create greater equality of opportunity, to
make reasonable terms for labor in employment, and to furnish vocational
education." He was quick to add his caution that "there is a line beyond
which the government cannot go with any good practical results in
seeking to make men and society better."

=The Regulation of Railways.=--The first attempts to use the government
in a large way to control private enterprise in the public interest were
made by the Northwestern states in the decade between 1870 and 1880.
Charges were advanced by the farmers, particularly those organized into
Granges, that the railways extorted the highest possible rates for
freight and passengers, that favoritism was shown to large shippers,
that fraudulent stocks and bonds were sold to the innocent public. It
was claimed that railways were not like other enterprises, but were
"quasi-public" concerns, like the roads and ferries, and thus subject to
government control. Accordingly laws were enacted bringing the railroads
under state supervision. In some cases the state legislature fixed the
maximum rates to be charged by common carriers, and in other cases
commissions were created with the power to establish the rates after an
investigation. This legislation was at first denounced in the East as
nothing less than the "confiscation" of the railways in the interest of
the farmers. Attempts to have the Supreme Court of the United States
declare it unconstitutional were made without avail; still a principle
was finally laid down to the effect that in fixing rates state
legislatures and commissions must permit railway companies to earn a
"fair" return on the capital invested.

In a few years the Granger spirit appeared in Congress. An investigation
revealed a long list of abuses committed by the railways against
shippers and travelers. The result was the interstate commerce act of
1887, which created the Interstate Commerce Commission, forbade
discriminations in rates, and prohibited other objectionable practices
on the part of railways. This meas