ssolved on boiling, and it is readily precipitated by hydrochloric
acid (Bence-Jones).

#Ostitis Deformans--Paget's Disease of Bone.#--This rare disease was
first described by Sir James Paget in 1877. In the early stages, the
marrow is transformed into a vascular connective tissue; its bone-eating
functions are exaggerated, and the framework of the bone becomes
rarefied, so that it bends under pressure as in osteomalacia. In course
of time, however, new bone is formed in great abundance; it is at first
devoid of lime salts, but later becomes calcified, so that the bones
regain their rigidity. This formation of new bone is much in excess of
the normal, the bones become large and bulky, their surfaces rough and
uneven, their texture sclerosed in parts, and the medullary canal is
frequently obliterated. These changes are well brought out in X-ray
photographs. The curving of the long bones, which is such a striking
feature of the disease, may be associated with actual lengthening, and
the changes are sometimes remarkably symmetrical (Fig. 135). The bones
forming the cranium may be enormously thickened, the sutures are
obliterated, the distinction into tables and diploe is lost, and, while
the general texture is finely porous, there may be areas as dense as
ivory (Fig. 134).

[Illustration: FIG. 134.--Changes in the Skull resulting from Ostitis
Deformans.

(Anatomical Museum, University of Edinburgh.)]

_Clinical Features._--The disease is usually met with in persons over
fifty years of age. It is insidious in its onset, and, the patient's
attention may be first attracted by the occurrence of vague pains in the
back or limbs; by the enlargement and bending of such bones as the tibia
or femur; or by a gradual increase in the size of the head,
necessitating the wearing of larger hats. When the condition is fully
developed, the attitude and general appearance are eminently
characteristic. The height is diminished, and, owing to the curving of
the lower limbs and spine, the arms appear unnaturally long; the head
and upper part of the spine are bent forwards; the legs are held apart,
slightly flexed at the knees, and are rotated out as well as curved; the
whole appearance suggests that of one of the large anthropoid apes. The
muscles of the limbs may waste to such an extent as to leave the large,
curved, misshapen bones covered only by the skin (Fig. 135). In the
majority of cases the bones of the lower extremities are much earlier
and more severely affected than those of the upper extremity, but the
capacity of walking is usually maintained even in the presence of great
deformity. In a case observed by Byrom Bramwell, the patient suffered
from a succession of fractures over a period of years.

[Illustration: FIG. 135.--Cadaver, illustrating the alterations in the
Lower Limbs resulting from Ostitis Deformans.]

The disease may last for an indefinite period, the general health
remaining long unaffected. In a considerable number of the recorded
cases one of the bones became the seat of sarcoma.

#Osteomyelitis Fibrosa.#--This comparatively rare disease, which was
first described by Recklinghausen, presents many interesting features.
Because of its causing deformities of the bones and an undue liability
to fracture, and being chiefly met with in adolescents, it is regarded
by some authors as a juvenile form of Paget's disease. It may be
diffused throughout the skeleton--we have seen it in the skull and in
the bones of the extremities--or it may be confined to a single bone,
usually the femur, or, what is more remarkable, the condition may affect
a portion only of the shaft of a long bone and be sharply defined from
the normal bone in contact with it.

[Illustration: FIG. 136.--Osteomyelitis Fibrosa affecting Femora in a
man aet. 19. The curving of the bones is due to multiple fractures.]

On longitudinal section of a long bone during the active stage of the
disease, the marrow is seen to be replaced by a vascular young
connective tissue which encroaches on the surrounding spongy bone,
reducing it to the slenderest proportions; the formation of bone from
the periosteum does not keep pace with the absorption and replacement
going on in the interior, and the cortex may be reduced to a thin shell
of imperfectly calcified bone which can be cut with a knife. The young
connective tissue which replaces the marrow is not unlike that seen in
osteomalacia; it is highly vascular and may show haemorrhages of various
date; there are abundant giant cells of the myeloma type, and
degeneration and liquefaction of tissue may result in the formation of
cysts, which, when they constitute a prominent feature, are responsible
for the name--_osteomyelitis fibrosa cystica_--sometimes applied to the
condition.

It would appear that most of the recorded cases of _cysts of bone_ owe
their origin to this disease, while the abundance of giant cells with
occasional islands of cartilage in the wall of such cysts is responsible
for the view formerly h