open until the end of the second year or longer, and
the frontal and parietal eminences are unduly prominent. There is
sometimes hydrocephalus, and the head is characteristically enlarged.
The jaws are altered so that while the upper jaw is contracted into the
shape of a #V#, the lower jaw is square instead of rounded in outline,
and the teeth do not oppose one another. In the _thorax_, the chief
feature may be the beading at the costo-chondral junctions, principally
of the fifth and sixth ribs or its walls may be contracted,
particularly if respiration is interfered with as a result of bronchial
catarrh or adenoids. The contraction may take the form of a vertical
groove on each side, or of a horizontal groove at the level of the upper
end of the xiphi-sternum; when the sternum and cartilages form a
projection in front, the deformity is known as "pigeon-breast."

The _spine_ may be curved backwards--_kyphosis_--throughout its
whole extent or only in one part; or it may be curved to one
side--_scoliosis_.

In the _limbs_, the prominent features are the deficient growth in
length of the long bones, the enlargements at the epiphysial junctions,
and the bending, and occasional greenstick fracture, of the shafts. The
degree of enlargement of the epiphysial junctions is directly
proportionate to the amount of movement to which the bone is subjected
(John Thomson). The curves at this stage depend on the attitude of the
child while sitting or being carried--for example, the arm bones become
bent in children who paddle about the floor with the aid of their arms;
and in a child who lies on its back with the lower limbs everted, the
weight of the limb may lead to curvature of the neck of the femur--coxa
vara. The clavicle or humerus may sustain greenstick fracture from the
child being lifted by the arms; the femur, by a fall. From the extreme
laxity of the ligaments, the joints can be moved beyond the normal
limits, and the child is often observed to twist its limbs into abnormal
attitudes.

_In Children who have walked._--In these children the most important
deformities occur in the spine, pelvis, and lower extremities, and
result for the most part from yielding of the softened bones under the
weight of the body. Scoliosis is the usual type of spinal curvature, and
in extreme cases it may lead to a pronounced form of hump-back. The
pelvis may remain small (_justo-minor pelvis_), or it may be contracted
in the sagittal plane (_flat pelvis_); when the bones are unusually
soft, the acetabular portions are pushed inwards by the femora bearing
the weight of the body, and the pelvis assumes the shape of a trefoil,
as in the malacia of women. The shaft of the femur is curved forwards
and laterally; the bones of the leg laterally as in bow-leg, or
forwards, or forwards and laterally just above the ankle. The
deformities at the knee (genu valgum, genu varum, and genu recurvatum),
and at the hip (coxa vara), will be described in the volume dealing with
the Extremities.

The majority of cases seen in surgical practice suffer from the
deformities resulting from rickets rather than from the active disease.
The examination of a large series of children at different ages shows
that the deformities become less and less frequent with each year. Those
who recover may ultimately show no trace of rickets, and this is
especially true of children who grow at the average rate; in those,
however, in whom growth is retarded, especially from the fifth to the
seventh year, the deformities are apt to be permanent. It may be noted
that the scoliosis due to rickets has little tendency towards recovery.

_Treatment._--The treatment of the disease consists in regulating the
diet, improving the surroundings, and preventing deformity. Phosphorus
in doses of 100th grain may be given dissolved in cod-liver oil, and
preparations of iron and lime may be added with advantage. To avoid
those postures which predispose to deformities, the child should lie as
much as possible. In the well-to-do classes this is readily accomplished
by the aid of a nurse and the use of a perambulator. In hospital
out-patients the child is kept off its feet by the use of a light wooden
splint applied to the lateral aspect of each lower extremity, and
extending from the pelvis to 6 inches beyond the sole.

When deformities are already present, the treatment depends upon whether
or not there is any prospect of the bone straightening naturally. Under
five years of age this may, as a rule, be confidently expected; the
child should be kept off its feet, and the limbs bathed and massaged. In
children of five or six and upwards, the prospect of natural
straightening is a diminishing one, and it is more satisfactory to
correct the deformity by operation. In rickety curvature of the spine,
the child should lie on a firm mattress, or, to allow of its being taken
into the open air, upon a double Thomas' splint extending from the
occiput to the heels; the muscles acting on the trunk should 