 At their sessions
and conferences local, state, and national issues were discussed until
finally, it seems, everything led to the quest of the franchise. By
solemn resolution in 1914 the National Federation of Women's Clubs,
representing nearly two million club women, formally endorsed woman
suffrage. In the same year the National Education Association, speaking
for the public school teachers of the land, added its seal of approval.

=State and National Action.=--Again the suffrage movement was in full
swing in the states. Washington in 1910, California in 1911, Oregon,
Kansas, and Arizona in 1912, Nevada and Montana in 1914 by popular vote
enfranchised their women. Illinois in 1913 conferred upon them the right
to vote for President of the United States. The time had arrived for a
new movement. A number of younger suffragists sought to use the votes of
women in the equal suffrage states to compel one or both of the national
political parties to endorse and carry through Congress the federal
suffrage amendment. Pressure then came upon Congress from every
direction: from the suffragists who made a straight appeal on the
grounds of justice; and from the suffragists who besought the women of
the West to vote against candidates for President, who would not approve
the federal amendment. In 1916, for the first time, a leading
presidential candidate, Mr. Charles E. Hughes, speaking for the
Republicans, endorsed the federal amendment and a distinguished
ex-President, Roosevelt, exerted a powerful influence to keep it an
issue in the campaign.

[Illustration: _Copyright by Underwood and Underwood, N.Y._

CONFERENCE OF MEN AND WOMEN DELEGATES AT A NATIONAL CONVENTION IN
1920]

=National Enfranchisement.=--After that, events moved rapidly. The great
state of New York adopted equal suffrage in 1917. Oklahoma, South
Dakota, and Michigan swung into line the following year; several other
states, by legislative action, gave women the right to vote for
President. In the meantime the suffrage battle at Washington grew
intense. Appeals and petitions poured in upon Congress and the
President. Militant suffragists held daily demonstrations in Washington.
On September 30, 1918, President Wilson, who, two years before, had
opposed federal action and endorsed suffrage by state adoption only,
went before Congress and urged the passage of the suffrage amendment to
the Constitution. In June, 1919, the requisite two-thirds vote was
secured; the resolution was carried and transmitted to the states for
ratification. On August 28, 1920, the thirty-sixth state, Tennessee,
approved the amendment, making three-fourths of the states as required
by the Constitution. Thus woman suffrage became the law of the land. A
new political democracy had been created. The age of agitation was
closed and the epoch of responsible citizenship opened.


=General References=

Edith Abbott, _Women in Industry_.

C.P. Gilman, _Woman and Economics_.

I.H. Harper, _Life and Work of Susan B. Anthony_.

E.R. Hecker, _Short History of Woman's Rights_.

S.B. Anthony and I.H. Harper, _History of Woman Suffrage_ (4 vols.).

J.W. Taylor, _Before Vassar Opened_.

A.H. Shaw, _The Story of a Pioneer_.


=Research Topics=

=The Rise of the Woman Suffrage Movement.=--McMaster, _History of the
People of the United States_, Vol. VIII, pp. 116-121; K. Porter,
_History of Suffrage in the United States_, pp. 135-145.

=The Development of the Suffrage Movement.=--Porter, pp. 228-254; Ogg,
_National Progress_ (American Nation Series), pp. 151-156 and p. 382.

=Women's Labor in the Colonial Period.=--E. Abbott, _Women in Industry_,
pp. 10-34.

=Women and the Factory System.=--Abbott, pp. 35-62.

=Early Occupations for Women.=--Abbott, pp. 63-85.

=Women's Wages.=--Abbott, pp. 262-316.


=Questions=

1. Why were women involved in the reform movements of the new century?

2. What is history? What determines the topics that appear in written
history?

3. State the position of women under the old common law.

4. What part did women play in the intellectual movement that preceded
the American Revolution?

5. Explain the rise of the discussion of women's rights.

6. What were some of the early writings about women?

7. Why was there a struggle for educational opportunities?

8. How did reform movements draw women into public affairs and what were
the chief results?

9. Show how the rise of the factory affected the life and labor of
women.

10. Why is the year 1848 an important year in the woman movement?
Discuss the work of the Seneca Falls convention.

11. Enumerate some of the early gains in civil liberty for women.

12. Trace the rise of the suffrage movement. Show the effect of the
Civil War.

13. Review the history of the federal suffrage amendment.

14. Summarize the history of the suffrage in the states.




CHAPTER XXIV

INDUSTRIAL DEMOCRACY


=The New Economic Age.=--The spirit of criticism and the measures of
reform designed to meet it, which characterized the opening years of