Joint lesions of the nature of Charcot's disease
may occur simultaneously with the alterations in the bones. In
_syringomyelia_ pathological fracture is not so frequent as in locomotor
ataxia; it is more likely to occur in the bones of the upper extremity,
and especially in the humerus. In some cases of _epilepsy_ the bones
break when the patient falls in a fit, and there is usually an
exaggerated amount of comminution.

In these affections the bones present no histological or chemical
alterations, and the X-ray shadow does not differ from the normal. It is
maintained, therefore, that the disposition to fracture does not depend
upon a fragility of the bone, but on the loss of the muscular sense and
of common sensation in the bones, as a result of which there is an
inability properly to throw the muscles into action and dispose the
limbs so as to place them under the most favourable conditions to meet
external violence.

#Osteogenesis Imperfecta#, #Fragilitas Ossium#, or #Congenital
Osteopsathyrosis#.--These terms are used to describe a condition in
which an undue fragility of the bones dates from intra-uterine life. It
may occur in several members of the same family. In severe cases,
intra-uterine fractures occur, and during parturition fresh fractures
are almost sure to be produced, so that at birth there is a combination
of recent fractures and old fractures united and partly united, with
bendings and thickenings of the bones. Large areas of the cranial vault
may remain membranous.

After birth the predisposition to fracture continues, the bones are
easily broken, the fractures are attended with little or no pain, the
crepitus is soft, and although union may take place, it may be delayed
and be attended with excess of callus. Cases have been observed in which
a child has sustained over a hundred fractures.

The bones show a feeble shadow with the X-rays, and appear thin and
atrophied; the medullary canal is increased at the expense of the
cortex.

In young infants in whom multiple fractures occur the prognosis as to
life is unfavourable, and no satisfactory treatment of the disease has
been formulated. If the patient survives, the tendency to fracture
gradually disappears.

#Hypertrophic Pulmonary Osteo-Arthropathy.#--This condition, which was
described by Marie in 1890, is secondary to disease in the chest, such
as chronic phthisis, empyema, bronchiectasis, or sarcoma of the lung.

There is symmetrical enlargement and deformity of the hands and feet;
the shafts of the bones are thickened, and the soft tissues of the
terminal segments of the digits hypertrophied. The fingers come to
resemble drum-sticks, and the thumb the clapper of a bell. The nails are
convex, and incurved at their free ends, suggesting a resemblance to the
beak of a parrot. There is also enlargement of the lower ends of the
bones of the forearm and leg, and effusion into the wrist and
ankle-joints. Skiagrams of the hands and feet show a deposit of new bone
along the shafts of the phalanges.


TUMOURS OF BONE

New growths which originate in the skeleton are spoken of as _primary
tumours_; those which invade the bones, either by metastasis from other
parts of the body or by spread from adjacent tissues, as _secondary_. A
tumour of bone may grow from the cellular elements of the periosteum,
the marrow, or the epiphysial cartilage.

Primary tumours are of the connective-tissue type, and are usually
solitary, although certain forms, such as the chondroma, may be multiple
from the outset.

_Periosteal tumours_ are at first situated on one side of the bone, but
as they grow they tend to surround it completely. Innocent periosteal
tumours retain the outer fibrous layer as a capsule. Malignant tumours
tend to perforate the periosteal capsule and invade the soft parts.

_Central_ or _medullary tumours_ as they increase in size replace the
surrounding bone, and simultaneously new bone is formed on the surface;
as this is in its turn absorbed, further bone is formed beneath the
periosteum, so that in time the bone is increased in girth, and is said
to be "expanded" by the growth in its interior.

#Primary Tumours--Osteoma.#--When the tumour projects from the surface
of a bone it is called an _exostosis_. When growing from bones developed
in membrane, such as the flat bones of the skull, it is usually dense
like ivory, and the term _ivory exostosis_ is employed. When derived
from hyaline cartilage--for example, at the ends of the long bones--it
is known as a _cartilaginous exostosis_. This is invested with a cap of
cartilage from which it continues to grow until the skeleton attains
maturity.

An exostosis forms a rounded or mushroom-shaped tumour of limited size,
which may be either sessile or pedunculated, and its surface is smooth
or nodulated (Figs. 138 and 139). A cartilaginous exostosis in the
vicinity of a joint may be invested with a synovial sac or bursa--the
so-called _exostosis bursata_. The bursa may be derived from the
synovial membran