ra bearing
the weight of the body, and the pelvis assumes the shape of a trefoil,
as in the malacia of women. The shaft of the femur is curved forwards
and laterally; the bones of the leg laterally as in bow-leg, or
forwards, or forwards and laterally just above the ankle. The
deformities at the knee (genu valgum, genu varum, and genu recurvatum),
and at the hip (coxa vara), will be described in the volume dealing with
the Extremities.

The majority of cases seen in surgical practice suffer from the
deformities resulting from rickets rather than from the active disease.
The examination of a large series of children at different ages shows
that the deformities become less and less frequent with each year. Those
who recover may ultimately show no trace of rickets, and this is
especially true of children who grow at the average rate; in those,
however, in whom growth is retarded, especially from the fifth to the
seventh year, the deformities are apt to be permanent. It may be noted
that the scoliosis due to rickets has little tendency towards recovery.

_Treatment._--The treatment of the disease consists in regulating the
diet, improving the surroundings, and preventing deformity. Phosphorus
in doses of 100th grain may be given dissolved in cod-liver oil, and
preparations of iron and lime may be added with advantage. To avoid
those postures which predispose to deformities, the child should lie as
much as possible. In the well-to-do classes this is readily accomplished
by the aid of a nurse and the use of a perambulator. In hospital
out-patients the child is kept off its feet by the use of a light wooden
splint applied to the lateral aspect of each lower extremity, and
extending from the pelvis to 6 inches beyond the sole.

When deformities are already present, the treatment depends upon whether
or not there is any prospect of the bone straightening naturally. Under
five years of age this may, as a rule, be confidently expected; the
child should be kept off its feet, and the limbs bathed and massaged. In
children of five or six and upwards, the prospect of natural
straightening is a diminishing one, and it is more satisfactory to
correct the deformity by operation. In rickety curvature of the spine,
the child should lie on a firm mattress, or, to allow of its being taken
into the open air, upon a double Thomas' splint extending from the
occiput to the heels; the muscles acting on the trunk should be braced
up by massage and appropriate exercises.

#Late Rickets# or #Rachitis Adolescentium# is met with at any age from
nine to seventeen, and is generally believed to be due to a
recrudescence of rickets which had been present in childhood. The
disease is not attended with any disturbance of the general health; the
pathological changes are the same as in infantile rickets, but are for
the most part confined to the ossifying junctions, especially those
which are most active during adolescence, for example at the knee-joint.
The patient is easily tired, complains of pain in the bones, and, unless
care is taken, deformity is liable to ensue. There can be no doubt that
adolescent rickets plays an important part in the production of the
deformities which occur at or near puberty, especially knock-knee and
bow-knee.

#Scurvy-Rickets# or #Infantile Scurvy#.--This disease, described by
Barlow and Cheadle, is met with in infants under two years who have been
brought up upon sterilised or condensed milk and other proprietary
foods, and is most common in the well-to-do classes. The haemorrhages,
which are so characteristic of the disease, are usually preceded for
some weeks by a cachectic condition, with listlessness and debility and
disinclination for movement. Very commonly the child ceases to move one
of his lower limbs--pseudo-paralysis--and screams if it is touched; a
swelling is found over one of the bones, usually the femur, accompanied
by exquisite tenderness; the skin is tense and shiny, and there may be
some oedema. These symptoms are due to a sub-periosteal haemorrhage, and
associated with this there may be crepitus from separation of an
epiphysis, rarely from fracture of the shaft of the bone. X-ray
photographs show enlargement of the bone, the periosteum being raised
from the shaft and new bone formed in relation to it. Haemorrhages also
occur into the skin, presenting the appearance of bruises, into the
orbit and conjunctiva, and from the mucous membranes.

The _treatment_ consists in correcting the errors in diet. The infant
should have a wet nurse or a plentiful supply of cow's milk in its
natural state. Anti-scorbutics in the form of orange, lemon, or grape
juice, and of potatoes bruised down in milk, may be given.

#Osteomalacia.#--The term osteomalacia includes a group of conditions,
closely allied to rickets, in which the bones of adults become soft and
yielding, so that they are unduly liable to bend or break.

One form occurs in _pregnant and puerperal women_, affecting most
commonly the pelvis and lumba