rts of the greater groups which are themselves
dependent on and allied with the two mammoth or Rockefeller and Morgan
groups. These two mammoth groups jointly ... constitute the heart of the
business and commercial life of the nation." Such was the picture of
triumphant business enterprise drawn by a financier within a few years
after the memorable campaign of 1896.

America had become one of the first workshops of the world. It was, by
virtue of the closely knit organization of its business and finance, one
of the most powerful and energetic leaders in the struggle of the giants
for the business of the earth. The capital of the Steel Corporation
alone was more than ten times the total national debt which the apostles
of calamity in the days of Washington and Hamilton declared the nation
could never pay. American industry, filling domestic markets to
overflowing, was ready for new worlds to conquer.


=References=

F.W. Taussig, _Tariff History of the United States_.

J.L. Laughlin, _Bimetallism in the United States_.

A.B. Hepburn, _History of Coinage and Currency in the United States_.

E.R.A. Seligman, _The Income Tax_.

S.J. Buck, _The Granger Movement_ (Harvard Studies).

F.H. Dixon, _State Railroad Control_.

H.R. Meyer, _Government Regulation of Railway Rates_.

W.Z. Ripley (editor), _Trusts, Pools, and Corporations_.

R.T. Ely, _Monopolies and Trusts_.

J.B. Clark, _The Control of Trusts_.


=Questions=

1. What proof have we that the political parties were not clearly
divided over issues between 1865 and 1896?

2. Why is a fall in prices a loss to farmers and a gain to holders of
fixed investments?

3. Explain the theory that the quantity of money determines the prices
of commodities.

4. Why was it difficult, if not impossible, to keep gold and silver at a
parity?

5. What special conditions favored a fall in silver between 1870 and
1896?

6. Describe some of the measures taken to raise the value of silver.

7. Explain the relation between the tariff and the income tax in 1894.

8. How did it happen that the farmers led in regulating railway rates?

9. Give the terms of the Sherman Anti-Trust Act. What was its immediate
effect?

10. Name some of the minor parties. Enumerate the reforms they
advocated.

11. Describe briefly the experiments of the farmers in politics.

12. How did industrial conditions increase unrest?

13. Why were conservative men disturbed in the early nineties?

14. Explain the Republican position in 1896.

15. Give Mr. Bryan's doctrines in 1896. Enumerate the chief features of
the Democratic platform.

16. What were the leading measures adopted by the Republicans after
their victory in 1896?


=Research Topics=

=Greenbacks and Resumption.=--Dewey, _Financial History of the United
States_ (6th ed.), Sections 122-125, 154, and 378; MacDonald,
_Documentary Source Book of American History_, pp. 446, 566; Hart,
_American History Told by Contemporaries_, Vol. IV, pp. 531-533; Rhodes,
_History of the United States_, Vol. VIII, pp. 97-101.

=Demonetization and Coinage of Silver.=--Dewey, _Financial History_,
Sections 170-173, 186, 189, 194; MacDonald, _Documentary Source Book_,
pp. 174, 573, 593, 595; Hart, _Contemporaries_, Vol. IV, pp. 529-531;
Rhodes, _History_, Vol. VIII, pp. 93-97.

=Free Silver and the Campaign of 1896.=--Dewey, _National Problems_
(American Nation Series), pp. 220-237, 314-328; Hart, _Contemporaries_,
Vol. IV, pp. 533-538.

=Tariff Revision.=--Dewey, _Financial History_, Sections 167, 180, 181,
187, 192, 196; Hart, _Contemporaries_, Vol. IV, pp. 518-525; Rhodes,
_History_, Vol. VIII, pp. 168-179, 346-351, 418-422.

=Federal Regulation of Railways.=--Dewey, _National Problems_, pp.
91-111; MacDonald, _Documentary Source Book_, pp. 581-590; Hart,
_Contemporaries_, Vol. IV, pp. 521-523; Rhodes, _History_, Vol. VIII,
pp. 288-292.

=The Rise and Regulation of Trusts.=--Dewey, _National Problems_, pp.
188-202; MacDonald, _Documentary Source Book_, pp. 591-593.

=The Grangers and Populism.=--Paxson, _The New Nation_ (Riverside
Series), pp. 20-37, 177-191, 208-223.

=General Analysis of Domestic Problems.=--_Syllabus in History_ (New
York State, 1920), pp. 137-142.




CHAPTER XX

AMERICA A WORLD POWER (1865-1900)


It has now become a fashion, sanctioned by wide usage and by eminent
historians, to speak of America, triumphant over Spain and possessed of
new colonies, as entering the twentieth century in the role of "a world
power," for the first time. Perhaps at this late day, it is useless to
protest against the currency of the idea. Nevertheless, the truth is
that from the fateful moment in March, 1775, when Edmund Burke unfolded
to his colleagues in the British Parliament the resources of an
invincible America, down to the settlement at Versailles in 1919 closing
the drama of the World War, this nation has been a world power,
influencing by its example, by its institutions, by its wealth, trade,
and arms the course of international affairs. And it should be said al